From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
but weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number two 30 recorded live
Thursday, August 26th, 2010. Support for Hanselman.
This is provided by Tellerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with John Torres doll about
continuous web deployments. This is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes this
week on handsome minutes. We're
talking to John tota stone
and I pronounced that incorrectly
cause I'm not Norwegian, but
you can tell me how
to pronounce your name, John.
Yeah, sure. It's John tower
stall or tell the stall
in a region and thanks
for having me. I'm thrilled
to have you on it.
So it's good to see
you again, if only virtually
what we're talking about today
is no click web deployment.
You've got the series on
your blog that you've been
talking about, about doing kind
of continuous deployment. We hear
about continuous integration a lot.
We, everyone, everyone who's got
any, any project of a
reasonable size has a build
server. And you've taken that
of course to a little
bit more sophisticated level, and
you're doing ongoing continuous deployment.
How, how often are you
deploying and where are you
deploying to what environments are
you deploying to? Well, I
mean, for, we are the
other place. We have kind
of three environments where we
deploy to the first one
being the development environment, the
second one being a test
or, or a staging and
a third one being production.
So for development, we're basically
deploying out we'll or we
can even if he wants
to deploy on every, every
check-in, but that will probably
be a bit too much
work for, for a build
server, but it's technically possible
to do for testing, staging.
We, the play, whenever our
testers need to test what
we've done in dev and
test and production, like we're
running it now and doing
scrum with like two weeks
into iterations that's every second
week. So it sounds like
you have removed any constraints
to deployment. Like I have
a talk that I do
about if you're using X
copy, you're doing it wrong.
And when, you know, when
you're on stage, you say
funny things sometimes, because they're
funny. And one of the
things that I say is
if you're using windows Explorer
to deploy your website, then
you're probably in trouble. Did
you always have a continuous
deployment situation or how were
you doing it the wrong
way first? And then did
someone decide finally that this
has to stop? Yeah, I
mean, we, we did what
basically most people do. I
guess we have like a,
a company that, that, that
are running our web servers.
So we handed the, the
deployment packages sorta, well, basically
we just ex ex copied
the websites over the dam
and they that's a certain
time when they were, when
they had some time to
do it, they deployed it
on a server that was
for test and production and
for development, we, we manage
the, that ourselves. So it
was a manual process for
doing a lot of that,
doing IAS changes, doing yeah.
All changes, except from like
just the files. You can't
need to manage yourself. And
that had a cost associated
with it, like having people
need to do. And sometimes
it has errors related to
it as well, because even
though we had like, you
need to do this and
that, and people sometimes mr.
Step or, or did something
wrong and the deployment didn't
work. So you give them
a package you said, but
then you kind of backtracked.
You gave them, you basically
either zipped up the files
or you ex copied them
over there. Did you then
give them like a word
document that said, and here's
what you need to do
to AIS with like screenshots
of IIS. Well, that's, that's
what they did in the
beginning. So like the first
time when, when we set
it up, they needed to,
to have the settings. But
from that, Ana was basically
almost to copy files, except
whenever we added a new
app to a website or
something like that. And then
we manually manually described how
to do that. And later
on, we just created a
batch file that did that
instead using the, the command
line integration to, to, to
AIS. And so the data
helps a lot and, but
we were thinking, well, we
can take this much further.
And actually interestingly enough, the,
the kind of main thing
that, that triggered me to
kind of duty do this
all the way was because
we, we saw that we're
doing scrum with two weeks
of durations. And I was
thinking, well, do we need
these iterations? Because it felt
like we were have this
pause between iterations that was
unnecessary. We felt kind of
artificial pause. And of course
we were looking into Kanban
and lean and how those
things works. And I figured,
well, if we're going to
do the Kanban way, it's
kind of hard to, to,
to do that if we
can't deploy at will or
yeah. So that was basically
what triggered us to, to,
to automate the whole thing.
Was the pause that you
found between iterations purely one
around deployment, or was it
an artificial pause? Well, it's
more like you kind of
have the stories that you
need to, to finish within
those two weeks and some
stories finish before others and
people start to pick up
like smaller tasks towards the
end of the sprint, because
that's the only time thing
you have time for. And
yeah, it just felt weird.
So I was thinking, well,
what if we can just
start a story, finish it
and deploy it well, test
and deploy it, of course.
And just keep that going.
Instead of having these fixed
length work periods that we
need to relate to. So
deployment for most people like
you described at the beginning
is just copying stuff. But
if you have multiple web
servers that you also have
to, you know, maybe take
nodes online or offline, you
have to ask yourself if
I'm going to be putting
something out into production, am
I I'm shutting production down?
Am I going to put
up a, you know, we're
down for five minutes, kind
of a warning upgrades can
be a little bit more
subtle, a little more complicated
than putting out all new,
fresh code and, and also
just manual tasks. Where did
you start from copying files?
I mean, I can visualize
that you have deployed dot
bat that probably went off
an X COVID things. Did
you start using web deploy
at that point or what
we call ms. Deploy? Yeah,
I mean, that was kind
of the next step. So
as I started to look
at that and while looking
at Emma's deployment and I
was looking then at the
command line version of a
missed deployment later looked at
the integration. We know how,
when in vicious studio 2010.
So I kind of try
to figure out how to
do is on a command
line and not for one
app, but for a complete
website, but with all its
app apps. So I kind
of, that's also what my
blog post is describing how
to do this per website.
And later on, I've seen
that we could probably have
done this with visual studio
and stat and created a
web deployment package with, with
web deploy or EMIS deploy
for each app and then
deployed them individually. What we're
doing today is that we
deploy each website to yeah.
To the destination. So you're
saying that you build, you
have multiple web, you have
multiple projects that build into
multiple websites That all make
up one larger, larger application.
You build those all into
some central location. Yeah, actually
the, the solution, how it
is today is that it's
integrated with the build server.
So to build server after
it's build all the files
just copies while we have
a custom task, that's copies,
fold the application files in,
in the file structure that
we using on a web
servers. So typically the, a
folder for the website name
and then the, for all
the folders for the virtual
directories and applications under there.
And yeah, that hierarchy just
drop them in there. And
I'll have ms. Deploy just
point to that directory and
ask it to package it
down, but that's just a
file part. And then of
course you have the IAS
setting certificates. Well, yeah, that's
basically the, the most important
part, I guess, and, and
those, those packages are then
automatically deployed to the two
first environments we have. So
to develop development and tests,
and we do a manual
trigger to do it for
production. And, and you mentioned
having servers. I mean, if
we have multiple servers and
things like that, what we
do have is a load
balancer so that we can
pull a server out of
the load balancing cluster without
effecting users. And we usually
also have a server available
and not being in the
cluster. So we usually starts
by deploying to that server.
But we did then was
that we wrote some par
PowerShell script, basically working on
the load balancer to, to
take a node offline automatically
and bring it online again.
When, when the deployment was
finished, we were using the
I application request routing module
for IAS today, right. A
R R right. And we
used to use the windows
load balancer to default one.
And, and when those server,
but we had some, some
problems, cause that was built
on like something called sticky
sessions on IPS or client
affinity. And we had a
lot of users coming from
the same IP, so we
weren't able to load balance
them. So we went to
ARR because that has sticky
sessions using cookies. So we
can differentiate every user behind
the same IP, making us
able to load balance. So,
yeah, and, and having a
load balancer is something I
really recommend for, for any
website, even if you don't
need it because of a
upscaling, just have it there
so that you can bring
a website or web server
down without taking a website
or, Yeah, it's surprising how
many problems will start up
when someone starts using a
w when someone adds a
second machine into a farm,
all sorts of coding problems,
application problems, state problems that
they never really thought about.
But if you are always
have tests include two machines,
regardless of what your original
scale needs are, you're going
to catch those things much
earlier. And then, like you
said, you get to practice
taking load balancers down, taking
notes down and being able
to seamlessly upgrade the servers
without any, you know, virtually
any downtime at all. But
there were a couple of
things that were interesting there,
I thought, and I want
to have, I want to
break it down. So the
listeners understand kind of where
one tool stops and where
another begins at the beginning.
You talked about you have,
you have ms. Build and
you had some custom tasks.
So you took the time
to actually write a couple
of custom tasks. It sounds
like NMS build, but then
you use PowerShell to make
changes to IIS when, and
then you have web deploy
in there as well. When
should someone know when to
use PowerShell, which seems like
a very blunt instrument, very
powerful tool that can do
anything versus one of the
more specialized tools like ms.
Build or web deploy. Well,
that's a good question. Cause
I created this whole solution
with just PowerShell in the
beginning. And then I, I
had looked at them as
deploy earlier, but I, miss
deployed is kind of hard
to just look at, get
it and do it. That
that's hard, at least their
command line version. I mean,
if you're using it inside
visual studio, it's simpler. I
mean, it's simple, but the
command line version, you, you
need to study it. You
need to figure out all
the inner working. So what's
going on in order to
get the complete picture of
what it's capable of doing.
So I happened to briefly
look at it and I
tweeted a message saying, well,
I feel this is really
hard to learn. Am I
the only one? And the
web deploy team came back
to me on Twitter. I
think a guy called Islam
found a way to deploy
team saying, well, what what's,
what, what can we do
for you? What what's, what's
your problem? So I sent
them a long email describing
the pain points I had
at that time, basically a
user looking at the tool
for the first time. And
we had some emails back
and forth and I think
they agreed with me and
it looks like they're gonna
look at how to, to,
to improve the user experience
at least for a kind
of first time user. So
what a, when I started
to use that tool, then
I quickly realized how much
that tool can do for
me. So that placed a
lot of the power sales
scripts that I had, the
majority of them, actually, the
only PowerShell script I have
left is the one that's
that is taking the load
balancer node often online. So,
so that was good. And
that was really helpful for
my team as well, because
it's really important for my
team to understand this process.
So that, I mean, I
might not work for this
company forever. So whenever I
leave, that's good that somebody
can keep maintaining this process.
So that was important. But
after probably something like 16,
20 hours of using and
trying out ms. Deploy, I
came up with this pretty
long command line, which solved
every problem we had as
for packaging, all the things
we needed and deployed on
the server. So it was
hard to kind of figure
out that command, but when
you have it, it's, it's,
it's lovely. And that's basically
my second blog post is
that command. Of course, it's,
it's specific to kind of
how we do things. Like
I said, we deploy a
website and you, you might
be able to simplify it.
But yeah, This is the
part of the show where
I mock you while actually
Tellerik mock says your applications,
that you're testing dependent on
external systems over which you
have no control. Maybe you're
being slowed down by those
systems, their lack of availability,
responsiveness. You want to do
TDD, right? Our friends at
Tellerik help you solve some
of those problems with their
newest mocking tool. Just mock
it'll let you do fast,
simple controlled unit tests, independent
of external resources like databases,
web services, proprietary code, unlike
some mocking tools, just mock
works with non-virtual methods, seal
classes, static methods, giving you
complete control of your code.
You can get more details.
You can download just mock
at telerik.com/just mock. And don't
forget to thank Tellerik for
supporting Hanselman it's on their
Facebook fan page, facebook.com/tellerik. Thanks
a lot. Yeah, it must
deploy, which is the underlying
kind of command line executable
that, that makes the web
deploy thing. Work is interesting
because from the web from
visual studio, it's easy to
deploy, but if you're going
to work on anything of
any size, you really don't
want to deploy from visual
studio. You want to think
about giving your build server
to do that. The UI
is really simple and you
know, I deploy nerd dinner.com
from visual studio. It's a
one it's a tiny little
app and it's not a
big deal doing it from
the command line though. Emma's
deploy has this kind of
weird verb noun thing that
is limited by the command
line. So you find yourself
going, you know, hyphen verb
this and hyphen this, that,
and it goes on for
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds
of characters and it's insanely
powerful, but I'm writing stuff
at the command line is
a huge hassle. Yeah. And
it's, it's really generic, which
makes it powerful. And it's
created to not only do
deployments, but to solve other
things as well. So people
are using it to migrate
stuff from one server to
the other. And it's, I
think it's, it's targeting boats.
It people and developers like
myself. So it covers a
lot of ground. Yeah. I
think that the, the idea
that you can package something
up is what's significant about
it, that, that you can
describe all the settings that
your application needs around app
pools or certificates or bindings,
put it all in this
manifest and then install it.
And then if you want,
what's nice about it from
a web farm perspective is
you can say this package
is perfect. Just change these
three parameters, like the name
and the password will be
different on this machine instead
of that machine. So you
kind of override what's already
inside of the manifest. Hmm.
And what's basically hard about
it is how to figure
out how to like query
the thing you want to
change and how to actually
replace it. And I must
deploy has this concept of,
of doing replace replacements, but
also creating parameters. So Y
what I ended up with,
but basically I wanted to
create parameters for every changes
I wanted to do to
the package. So I could
just have like one package
for, for all three or
per environment. And then just
during deployment, I'll just send
in the parameters I needed,
which were specific for that
server or for that environment.
However, replace and parameter works
a bit different. So parameter
actually replaces the whole attributes
you're targeting while replace can
replace part parts of that
attribute value. And that got
a bit problematic. So what
I ended up was doing
a pit of replaced and
a bit of parameters that's
I explained this and that
blog posts. So it's, it's
probably easier to get an
overview there, but I think
that was the trick in
order to, to get this
as painful As possible. Right.
And we'll include links to
both of those blurred blog
posts in the, in the
show notes. And you have
a very nice, organized build,
deploy process. That explains actually
step by step by step
in text, what you're doing.
One of the things I
also wanted to kind of
dig a little bit more
into was this idea of
taking the load balancer nodes
offline and online. I'm not
sure if everyone who listens
has multiple web servers, but
if you do, you typically
have a load balancer that
makes the decision about whether
or not you're going to
go to this machine or
that machine. So if you
have www.hanselman.com, there might be
a www one and www
two in the background that
it's getting routed back and
forth. And when you upgrade,
typically you do rolling upgrades
where you'll remove a server
from the farm, you'll upgrade
it and you'll test it
and you make sure it's
good. And then you'll roll
it back into the farm.
And it sounds like you
were using PowerShell and PowerShell
remoting before. And this is
what I did. Actually. I
did this before PowerShell remoting
existed. I actually, we wrote
a service, a windows, little
windows service that actually hosted
PowerShell 1.04 PowerShell supported remoting.
And then we would remote
in kind of like, like,
like the way people use
shush use SSH. Now we
remote in, we take the
server down, we do things
to IAS and then we
deploy. But now there's this
thing called a web farm
framework. Can you talk about
what you do in PowerShell
versus what the web farm
framework can do? So, as
I said, I, at first
I created everything in PowerShell
and then I looked at
them as deploy. And then
I briefly also looked at
the webform framework. The first
thing I noticed was that
the web framework is currently
in beta, I guess. So
I wasn't too sure if
I want to go and
use that. But I mean,
that basically replaces the last
power sales script. I have
left if I, if I,
I use that as far
as I can understand. So
the only reason for me
not implementing that yet is
basically because of time, I
guess, but there was also
some issues. If I remember
correctly, I was trying to
look at how to use
it, but think they are
solved. Now, I was just
looking through this, this mailing
list. And so, yeah, from,
from what I, I I've
read, it will solve my
problems. So, and as you
said, that basically integrates with
a load balancer. I think
it only know integrates with
ARR, but I, it looks
like they have plans for
integrating with, with the other,
other load balancers in the
future. But that, that tool
does of course do a
lot more than just, just
working with the load balancer
and basically the provisioning so
that you just define a
master server for yeah. One
last master server and you
deployed to that. And that
web framework just makes sure
that the provisions everything over
to the other servers in,
in that same cluster. And
of course that makes, makes
it really easy because you
don't have to think about
all the servers that are
actually in your cluster, because
it would provision all the
changes over. And if I'm
not mistaken, it Phil of
course take ha ha handle
all the, I mean, taking
servers on and offline so
that the users of the
website, the 0.1 notice, notice
downtime or anything like that.
Yeah, it's, it's really interesting
because it seems like it's
something that should have been
included right out of the
box and the way that
it integrates makes it feel
like it was there all
the time. Like if you
go into iOS seven, now
you have app pools and
sites. And we all know
about the little, you know,
the little sites tree that
opens up. This adds a
new one that says server
farms. And then you can
have the servers within your
server farm and you can
go in and say, well,
here are the applications that
I have that I want
on those servers. And here
are the, the, the, the
quote unquote products that I
want, like buy products. This
is like going into, had
removed features and saying, well,
I need asp.net and I
need static content and I
need HTP compression. And then
you just hit, okay. And
it, it pushes those out
too to make sure that
everything is provisioned. And like
you said, you don't have
to think about anything and,
and once it's installed, it
does feel like it's been
there all the while. And
I particularly liked the PowerShell
stuff because you can literally
say remove server and ad
server from the start server
stops or removed server new
server from the command line,
which of course the irony
of all these kinds of
things. And one of the
good things and the bad
things about Microsoft is that
we've all as developers written
this stuff before, you know,
I mean, I totally wrote
get web farm and totally
wrote removed server in PowerShell,
you know, five years ago,
but now it's out. So
I can do refactoring via
subtraction. You know, I can
remove the code I wrote.
I mean, it's interesting, you're
describing all the custom stuff
that you did and how
you're slowly, you're slowly moving
over to the, kind of
the standard, the standard solution.
I guess there's a, I
guess there's maybe one reason
why we still might not
go for the web form
framework. And that is when
we, when we deploy to
production, I said, well, actually
let me just work really
quickly through the build process
and a package thing. So
we build, build everything on
a server. We created packages
for the dev environment and
the test environment and a
production environment. And we'd take
like for a Devin test,
everything is automated, but for
production, we manually initiate the
deployment process. And one of
those things that we do
then is that you need
to log on using the
power sales script. So as
you provide a username and
password, which then will be
used to get access to
the deployment server that you're
going to deploy to, and
you also being prompted for
a couple of other passwords
for, for instance, like password
for, for getting access to
certificates and stuff like that.
This just a step in
order to secure that not
any dev or anybody in
the office can suddenly accidentally
deploy to production. I did
also a security, the thing
where there are certain passwords
we have stored, which not
that many people should know
about, four systems were integrated
with like web services and
stuff like that. And then
we can deploy to one
server. So it automatically takes
that server offline deploys to
it. And what we usually
do then is that we
like point our hosts file
to that server so that
we can test the webs,
the web applications running on
that server. So we're the
only one that get access
to that. So if you
go, come in from the
outside, he will hit the
others. We test that and
make sure that everything went
okay, and then we'd go,
just go to the next
step and say, well, everything's
fine deploy to the others.
So we'll bring that first
server into the cluster and
take the other ones out
and then upgrade them and
bring them back online. You
had a couple of tips
within this process. That's up
on your blog that will
link to that. I thought
were significant tricks because they,
they are things that the
listener can, can use that,
that you've discovered kind of
while you're in the trenches.
One of them I thought
was really interesting was you
said clear all of the
ISDN settings and completely re
re recreate the I S
schema, Right? That's, that's definitely
what I did in a
PowerShell scripts. Then I literally
just cleaned the whole AIS
and well, I actually, I
did a backup of just
cleared every, every content within
IAS. And then I started
my script, basically adding sites
and applications and certificates and
stuff like that. So my,
my argument for doing that
is, is to avoid the,
the manual process getting in
the way of, of, or
making errors, because if somebody
does a manual step and
next time you deploy that
manual step would be over
it. And if it's not
included in the script or
whatever you're using. So it's
just a way to force
force it's to, to use,
to scripts and, and avoid
manual errors. Well, that is
just, so that is so
important. I mean, if, if
there's one thing that people
should get out of the,
the, the whole concept of
continuous integration and then expanding
that into continuous deployment is
anything that you do manually
will be screwed up at
some point by somebody. Yeah.
And, and all these things
you do manually. I mean,
in this whole process are
screaming for automation because basically
everything you do manually has
some kind of tool or
a script or something associated
with it. So you can
always just trigger that. And
that's also why I often
prefer doing it using the
server core version of the
2008. Cause you have The
report, doesn't include a user
interface, so you're forced to
scripted, Right? Yeah, of course
you can get a remote
connection to the IAS and
handle it from somewhat a
computer. But I know ways
of like getting a user
interface locally and, and work
on it remote. But I
just think that since you
get a tiny bit of
extra per for, I guess,
using server core and, and,
and the scripting part as
well, then yeah. That's what
I prefer. Well, the other
two things that you recommend
are kind of two sides
of the same coin first
pre compile the websites take,
take advantage of the fact
that you are in the
middle of a build process
and not just do your
standard compilation, but pre compile
the entire site, the DASP
X pages and all of
that stuff. And then on
the other side of the
coin, actually take advantage of
the EIS warmup module, literally
warm your applications up, don't
throw a cold app out
into a server farm and
hope that he's going to
be okay. Yeah. Because I
mean, the, if you like,
we do, we can deploy
during work hours. Right. It
doesn't matter. But if you
deploy a called app during
work hours there, the poor
guy that, that hits or
the poor guys that hit
that server the first time
after it's being upgraded, we'll
get that hit. So yeah.
Pre compile or, or warmup
it's, it's, it's a must,
if you're at least going
to deploy at will at
any time And not to
mention the, the application itself,
that poor application, not just
the poor user, but the
poor application is going to
have to do their best
to, to get up. It's
almost like having someone run
a race and you're adding
a new person to the
race, except you're going to
have them jump out of
a car that's moving and
then start running right away.
That's asking an awful lot
of an application to, to
do all of the things
it needs to do to
cash and get ready and
warmed up while everyone else
is running full speed. Yeah,
definitely. And what we've done
in, in Devon and test
is that whenever you use,
let's say you manually starting
a new build for tests.
For instance, if you need
to get that, it's, it's
really important for you to
get that deployment out right
now, you might just opt
out on the pre compile
step. And in our case,
it saves you like 15
minutes because you just want
to get it out there
and test it. But of
course you need to wait
maybe a minute or something
for, for the app to
warm up, but for production,
it's a pre compilation. It's
always on. That's just, yeah,
we have to do that.
Very cool. So I'm going
to put links to all
of this up on the
web. Are you, are you
going to continue this process?
Are you going to, there's
gonna be a part three
and a part four. Yeah.
I have a published part
too, I guess a week
or so ago. Maybe more.
I was hoping to get
the other two others out
by now, but time issues
and stuff like that. I'll,
I'm always almost finished with
part three, which, which will
cover the load balancing part.
I'll just drop the PowerShell
scripts out there. So, so
people can use them. And
part four is I guess,
the build process, how you
can get to every thing,
all of these things integrated
into to build and have
everything three ger, three, good
from that from, from, from
there. And as part of
this whole process, I also
started using TFS 2010. So
I then used the workflow
steps and things like that.
The workflow part of MSF
build, which was also interesting.
And I have some, probably
some, some, some annoyances there
as well, but every, every
everything Kathy. Yeah. Well, I
mean, also it's funny how
actual work interferes with blogging.
Yeah. And then another talk
about actually spending time with
weed. Yes. Not to mention
family. Yeah. Well, cool. Well,
thanks so much for spending
the time with me today.
It's been great. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. See you again next
week. .